

Test Cases Design

The testing phase is crucial in the software development lifecycle as it allows for the software to be evaluated to determine if it meets the requirements. The aim of testing is to confirm the correctness of parts of the system, the correct communication between the components of the system and the correct functionality of the system under normal and abnormal conditions.

The test cases have been formulated based on the functional requirements which is obtained from Chapter 3. The testing process involved validating the log collection process, AI assisted analysis, automated response workflows, notification services, and case management functionalities.

Table 5.1: Test Cases Designed for Functional Validation of the Intelligent Security Operations Platform

Test Case ID



Test Scenario



Expected Result



Status



TC-01

Wazuh agent sends logs to manager

Logs should be collected and indexed successfully

Passed

TC-02

Detection of brute force attack simulation

Alert generated with appropriate severity

Passed

TC-03

Natural language query through MCP server

AI provides contextual explanation and results

Passed

TC-04

High severity alert generation

Notification sent to analyst

Passed

TC-05

SOAR workflow execution

Automated workflow executed successfully

Passed

TC-06

Incident creation in DFIR-IRIS

Incident case generated automatically

Passed

TC-07

Unauthorized user access attempt

Access denied through RBAC

Passed

TC-08

Audit log generation

User activity recorded successfully

Passed



Unit Testing

Individual system components were tested in Unit testing to assess the system components separately from the other modules. This testing was done to confirm the functionality of each component was performed as it was supposed to be. The following testing is done on each of the main components:

Wazuh Agent Module

The Wazuh agent module was tested to make sure it could gather security logs from endpoints and send them to the manager. A variety of event logs are produced, such as authentication, process and system events.

Result: Agents were able to gather and transfer logs without loss of information.

MCP Server Module

The module for the MCP server was tested independently and validated:

Connection with Elasticsearch

Retrieval of alerts

Processing natural language queries:

AI-generated responses

Result: The MCP server is able to return context-aware responses to queries.

SOAR Workflow Module

The following shuffles were tested independently to validate:

Trigger generation

External API integration

Notification delivery

Case creation

Result: Workflows were run successfully and automated actions were triggered as appropriate.

Notification Module

High severity alerts were created for testing Slack and Discord integration.

Result: Successful delivery of notifications, including appropriate incident information.

Integration Testing

Following unit testing, integration testing was carried out to verify the effective communication and correct exchange of information between modules. The following integrations were tested:

Integration between Wazuh and Elasticsearch

Wazuh was responsible for collecting the security logs at endpoints and sending them to Elasticsearch for indexing and storage.

Result: All logs were successfully indexed and real-time dashboards were created.

Integration between Elasticsearch and MCP Server

MCP server was integrated with Elasticsearch APIs to fetch alerts data and agent information.

Result: Data retrieved for alert information and metadata was successful.

Integration between Wazuh and SOAR Platform

Through webhook communication, critical alerts raised by Wazuh have activated SOAR workflows.

Result: SOAR Playbooks implemented effectively.

Integration between SOAR and DFIR-IRIS

If high severity alerts arise, they were automatically created as incidents in DFIR-IRIS through the SOAR platform.

Result: All alert information and evidence was used to create incident cases.

Integration between SOAR and Notification Services

Discord and Slack were added as notification channels to alert in real-time.

Result: Deliveries of notifications without delay were made.

User Acceptance Testing

For the developed system, User Acceptance Testing (UAT) was carried out to ensure that the system is acceptable by the users and fulfills project goals. The testing of the platform included assessing the platform from the point of view of the intended users—such as security analysts and administrators. The following criteria were used:

Security Monitoring Validation

Users determined if dashboards were accurate in displaying security events and useful for providing visualizations.

Feedback: The dashboard was able to give a central view of security events.

AI Assistance Validation

AI generated explanations were assessed for understandability and usefulness by users.

Feedback: The MCP server made clear and context-aware explanations that aided in threat analysis.

Automated Response Validation

Users looked at the impact of automated workflows on the amount of manual work required to manage incidents.

Feedback: Repeated tasks were greatly minimized and efficiency was enhanced with automation.

System Usability Validation

The interface was analyzed for ease of use and accessibility by the users.

Feedback: The system’s interface was user-friendly and easy to use.

The platform introduced, overall, fulfilled the acceptance criteria and met the objectives that were identified in requirement analysis.

Implementation

Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)

A Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) has been created to break the project down into smaller tasks and activities to facilitate effective planning and execution. The project was broken down into a series of phases.

Phase 1: Requirement Analysis and Research

Activities:

Literature review

Existing solution analysis

Requirement gathering

Project planning

Phase 2: Environment Setup

Activities:

Installation of Ubuntu server

Installation of Wazuh stack.

Configuration of Elasticsearch

Kibana dashboards configuration

Phase 3: MCP Server Development

Activities:

Designing API architecture

Developing MCP server

Integrating with LLM APIs.

Developing web interface

Phase 4: SOAR Integration

Activities:

Installation of Shuffle/n8n

Workflow creation

DFIR-IRIS integration

Notification configuration

Phase 5: Testing and Evaluation

Activities:

Unit testing

Integration testing

Performance testing

User acceptance testing

Phase 6: Documentation

Activities:

Report writing

Diagram creation

Final presentation preparation

Team Roles and Responsibilities

The project was developed collaboratively, and responsibilities were distributed among team members.

Table 6.1: Team Member Activities

Team Member



Activities



Arfan Abid

Wazuh installation and configuration, ELK stack integration, dashboard development, testing

Muhammad Yasir

MCP server development, web application development, SOAR integration, API development



Joint responsibilities:

Literature review 

Documentation 

Testing and evaluation 

Final presentation preparation

Tools and Technologies

Table 6.2: Tools and Technologies Used in Project

Component



Technology



SIEM Platform

Wazuh

Search and Storage Engine

Elasticsearch

Visualization Dashboard

Kibana

SOAR Platform

n8n

Incident Response Platform

DFIR-IRIS

AI Component

Large Language Models

Middleware

MCP Server

Programming Language

Python

Frontend

Next.js

Backend APIs

FastAPI

Operating System

Ubuntu Server

Cloud Platform

Contabo

Database

Elasticsearch Index



Implementation Details

The proposed system was implemented in the modular fashion.

Initially, agents for endpoint systems like Linux and Windows machines were added to Wazuh. The agents were constantly tracking system activity and logging authentication activity, process activity, file integrity monitoring, and network activity.

Collected Logs were sent to Wazuh manager for normalization and correlation. Processed events were then passed to Elasticsearch to index and store the events.

Kibana dashboards were set up to provide visualization for:

Active agents

Security alerts

Threat severity

Authentication activities

System health metrics

The MCP server was developed using Python and FastAPI. It gets alert data and agent information from Elasticsearch APIs based on a user query and sends them back to the user.

The MCP server is an intermediate layer between SIEM data and AI models. It provides a framework for security information and provides the LLM with context input for analysis.

SOAR functionality was achieved with the help of Shuffle/n8n workflows. The following workflows were set up to:

Receive alerts

Carry out IP reputation checks.

Trigger automated notifications

Make incident cases in DFIR-IRIS

Perform predetermined response actions.

All the system was placed within a virtual environment to mimic an actual SOC design.

Screenshots of Prototype/System



Figure 6.1: Wazuh Dashboard showing active agents and security alerts.



Figure 6.2: Kibana dashboard displaying threat visualization and analytics.



Figure 6.3: MCP Server web application home page



Figure 6.4: Core SOAR pipeline for automated alert triage and incident response



Figure 6.5: AI-powered alert enrichment workflow for automated SOC analysis and incident reporting



Figure 6.6: Automated brute force detection and response playbook for real-time attack identification and escalation



Figure 6.7: Privilege escalation detection playbook for automated identification and escalation of suspicious activity



Figure 6.8: Incident case generated in DFIR-IRIS

Challenges During Implementation

There were a number of implementation issues:

Integration Complexity

There was a need for various independent tools to communicate with one another, such as Wazuh, Elasticsearch, MCP server, Shuffle/n8n and DFIR-IRIS. API management and compatibility was a challenge and needed a lot of work.

Performance Limitations

When dealing with high volumes of security events, the indexing process and AI response times could be impacted under certain hardware constraints.

AI Context Handling

Efficient extraction of the context information from SIEM data was necessary to generate accurate AI responses.

False Positives

Unnecessary alerts were initially generated by security rules and needed to be tuned and optimized.

Resource Constraints

Many security components were needed to run together, and this needed significant CPU and memory resources.



Conclusions



Summary

With the emergence of advanced and evolving cyber threats, and complexity of modern system infrastructure, intelligent and automated security solutions are needed. The traditional security mechanisms are not enough to handle huge security data in order to respond in time to attacks.

 The project envisioned and designed an Intelligent Security Operations Platform, to be used for Automated Threat Detection and Response, with open-source technologies and Artificial Intelligence capabilities. 

The proposed platform would combine Wazuh SIEM with the AI-powered MCP server and SOAR technologies, offering centralized monitoring, intelligent contextual analysis, and natural language interaction and automated response. 

The developed solution tackled the following limitations in the existing solutions:

Collecting and monitoring logs in a centralized manner

Intelligent Contextual Threat Assessment (ICTA) 

Natural language interaction 

Automated incident response workflows

Incident Management & Notifications 

Cost-effective open-source implementation

The designed solution proved effective in showcasing the capabilities of AI and automation to enhance analyst productivity, mitigate alert fatigue, and minimize incident response time.

Recommendations for Future Work

The proposed platform successfully accomplished the goals of the project, but there are some future enhancements to be made.

Future enhancements include:

Advanced machine learning models for anomaly detection integrated

Implementing more endpoint detection and response (EDR) solution

Integrations with other threat intelligence sources

Enforcement of predictive threat analytics functionality

Endpoints isolated during containment actions

Support for multi-cloud environment

Improving AI performance with Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)

Building mobile apps for live alert monitoring

Enhancement of dashboard visualization & reporting capabilities



